Picture Vocabulary Test
Scoring Process: Item Response Theory (IRT).
a theta score is calculated for each participant; it represents the relative overall ability or performance of the participant. A theta score is very similar to a z-score, which is a statistic with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one. 
Age-Corrected and Uncorrected Standard Scores, and Fully Corrected T Scores are provided for the TPVT (associated Percentiles can be found in Appendix A)
Interpretation: The TPVT is a measure of general vocabulary knowledge and is considered to be a strong
measure of crystallized abilities (those abilities that are more dependent upon past learning experiences
and are relatively consistent across the adult life span). To interpret individual performance, one can
evaluate all three types of scores. 
An Uncorrected Standard score allows us to view the participant’s performance in comparison to the
census-matched U.S. population, allowing for a more absolute view of the participant’s ability and
allows for gauging true improvement or decline from previous assessments. 
The Fully Corrected T Scores have been statistically adjusted to level the playing field interpretively, such that an individual’s
score can be compared to a narrower group, more similar demographically. 
A raw score does not provide relevant information on a computer-adaptive test. (Raw scores are useful for
monitoring absolute improvement/decline over time when statistical transformations are not used in
the scoring process, such as occur in IRT-based scoring or in the Flanker or DCCS measures, described
below.) Thus, an increase in the Uncorrected Standard score (or the participant’s obtained theta value,
alternatively) represents real improvement by the participant in vocabulary knowledge; however,this
individual’s Age-Corrected Standard Score may or may not have increased, depending on howhis/her performance at Time 1 and Time 2 compared to the age cohorts used in the national norms. An
individual who has made small gains in overall knowledge may still have regressed when compared with
age-similar peers if the national sample of peers made larger gains in knowledge over the same period.
Thus, one can see the value of the variety of NIH Toolbox scores provided. Each language version of the
TPVT is calibrated independently using language-specific items administered to a language-specific
cohort. Therefore, TPVT computed scores are not compatible between different languages (similar
scores on the English and Spanish picture vocabulary tests are not comparable).
